README.md, before:

# The problems with carbon-aware software that everyone’s ignoring.

**Authors:** <a href="https://www.google.com/url?q=https://www.linkedin.com/in/hanopcan/&amp;sa=D&amp;source=editors&amp;ust=1699360648357123&amp;usg=AOvVaw2QPHsKNeHm_mkgdJztA65v">Hannah Smith</a> and <a href="https://www.google.com/url?q=https://www.linkedin.com/in/ismaelvelasco/&amp;sa=D&amp;source=editors&amp;ust=1699360648356766&amp;usg=AOvVaw1o4hmdZ2koxtYFrzisxYnx">Ismael Velasco</a>

**Reviewers and contributors:** <a href="https://www.google.com/url?q=https://www.linkedin.com/in/mikeoghia/&amp;sa=D&amp;source=editors&amp;ust=1699360648357458&amp;usg=AOvVaw2SdnYvf41QVNXpQHVJLQvg">Michael J. Oghia</a>, <a class="c10" href="https://www.google.com/url?q=https://www.linkedin.com/in/fershad/&amp;sa=D&amp;source=editors&amp;ust=1699360648357664&amp;usg=AOvVaw3OHfY7Qq_neAg5vgyj-psA">Fershad Irani</a>, <a class="c10" href="https://www.google.com/url?q=https://www.dcs.gla.ac.uk/~wim/&amp;sa=D&amp;source=editors&amp;ust=1699360648357863&amp;usg=AOvVaw1hQV80bzme-GRlktWVwhew">Wim Vanderbauwhed</a>.

**Additional informal input and advice:** <a class="c10" href="https://www.google.com/url?q=https://www.linkedin.com/in/philip-jenner-348b1a31/&amp;sa=D&amp;source=editors&amp;ust=1699360648358200&amp;usg=AOvVaw2lPaxwv7EHjxZxtSTLD5h5">Phillip Jenner</a>, Ecotricity

## TL;DR / Executive Summary

1. The core concept of shifting compute jobs to respond to the grid is a smart one. But we need to usher in the next, more mature and nuanced version which we’re calling ‘grid-aware computing’.

2. There are only small-to-zero carbon reduction benefits from implementing most current carbon-aware time-shifting and location-shifting computing approaches, while adding significant risks of unintended destructive effects. 

3. If such approaches are adopted at scale without implementation constraints, they are likely to increase emissions and destabilise electricity grid systems. This does not improve the tech industry’s contributions to global sustainability, but rather worsens them. It also risks becoming, or is already, a greenwashing effort and little more.

4. The key failure is never mentioning that "terms and conditions apply". Carbon-aware computing that can yield actual carbon reductions is: 
	- Running when demand is low using curtailed electricity in stable grids, or;
	- Running on genuinely additive renewable electricity.

5. If we really want to make computing more sustainable, the central, dominant question is “is your compute’s net electricity demand reducing?”. Finding ways to limit the growth of computing is a far more effective way to contribute to lowering emissions than optimisation.


## License

This work is open source and licensed using Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International (<a href="https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/deed.en">CC BY-SA 4.0 Deed</a>).

In short you are free to use this work, but you must give appropriate credit and link back to this repo.

<a href="https://github.com/climateaction-tech/grid-aware-software">https://github.com/climateaction-tech/grid-aware-software</a>.

## Sections

This body of work is divided into 6 distinct sections:

- [Houston, we have a problem](we-have-a-problem.md)
- [What software engineers need to know about how the grid works](how-the-grid-works.md)
- [What’s the problem with carbon-aware software then?](problem-with-carbon-aware-software.md)
- [When does carbon-aware software make sense?](when-does-carbon-aware-make-sense.md)
- [Where do we take carbon-aware from here? Introducing grid-aware computing](grid-aware-computing.md)
- [What can you do to help?](how-can-you-help.md)

## Context/about 

The body of work presented here, started after Ismael posted some questions and research into the <a href="https://climateaction.tech/community/">CAT's Slack</a>. Hannah, amongst many others picked up on the discussion. 

Following debate, Hannah and Ismael agreed to work together to further develop the research on the problems with carbon-aware and ultimately come up with the outline of a proposal to improve it. 

If it were not for <a href="https://cliamteaction.tech">CAT</a> this work would not have come to fruition on this way - thank you CAT for bringing people together!

Commit message:

Add elephant in the room section

README.md, after:

# The problems with carbon-aware software that everyone’s ignoring.

**Authors:** <a href="https://www.google.com/url?q=https://www.linkedin.com/in/hanopcan/&amp;sa=D&amp;source=editors&amp;ust=1699360648357123&amp;usg=AOvVaw2QPHsKNeHm_mkgdJztA65v">Hannah Smith</a> and <a href="https://www.google.com/url?q=https://www.linkedin.com/in/ismaelvelasco/&amp;sa=D&amp;source=editors&amp;ust=1699360648356766&amp;usg=AOvVaw1o4hmdZ2koxtYFrzisxYnx">Ismael Velasco</a>

**Reviewers and contributors:** <a href="https://www.google.com/url?q=https://www.linkedin.com/in/mikeoghia/&amp;sa=D&amp;source=editors&amp;ust=1699360648357458&amp;usg=AOvVaw2SdnYvf41QVNXpQHVJLQvg">Michael J. Oghia</a>, <a class="c10" href="https://www.google.com/url?q=https://www.linkedin.com/in/fershad/&amp;sa=D&amp;source=editors&amp;ust=1699360648357664&amp;usg=AOvVaw3OHfY7Qq_neAg5vgyj-psA">Fershad Irani</a>, <a class="c10" href="https://www.google.com/url?q=https://www.dcs.gla.ac.uk/~wim/&amp;sa=D&amp;source=editors&amp;ust=1699360648357863&amp;usg=AOvVaw1hQV80bzme-GRlktWVwhew">Wim Vanderbauwhed</a>.

**Additional informal input and advice:** <a class="c10" href="https://www.google.com/url?q=https://www.linkedin.com/in/philip-jenner-348b1a31/&amp;sa=D&amp;source=editors&amp;ust=1699360648358200&amp;usg=AOvVaw2lPaxwv7EHjxZxtSTLD5h5">Phillip Jenner</a>, Ecotricity

## TL;DR / Executive Summary

1. The core concept of shifting compute jobs to respond to the grid is a smart one. But we need to usher in the next, more mature and nuanced version which we’re calling ‘grid-aware computing’.

2. There are only small-to-zero carbon reduction benefits from implementing most current carbon-aware time-shifting and location-shifting computing approaches, while adding significant risks of unintended destructive effects. 

3. If such approaches are adopted at scale without implementation constraints, they are likely to increase emissions and destabilise electricity grid systems. This does not improve the tech industry’s contributions to global sustainability, but rather worsens them. It also risks becoming, or is already, a greenwashing effort and little more.

4. The key failure is never mentioning that "terms and conditions apply". Carbon-aware computing that can yield actual carbon reductions is: 
	- Running when demand is low using curtailed electricity in stable grids, or;
	- Running on genuinely additive renewable electricity.

5. If we really want to make computing more sustainable, the central, dominant question is “is your compute’s net electricity demand reducing?”. Finding ways to limit the growth of computing is a far more effective way to contribute to lowering emissions than optimisation.


## License

This work is open source and licensed using Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International (<a href="https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/deed.en">CC BY-SA 4.0 Deed</a>).

In short you are free to use this work, but you must give appropriate credit and link back to this repo.

<a href="https://github.com/climateaction-tech/grid-aware-software">https://github.com/climateaction-tech/grid-aware-software</a>.

## Sections

This body of work is divided into seven distinct sections:

1. [Houston, we have a problem](we-have-a-problem.md)
1. [What software engineers need to know about how the grid works](how-the-grid-works.md)
1. [What’s the problem with carbon-aware software then?](problem-with-carbon-aware-software.md)
1. [When does carbon-aware software make sense?](when-does-carbon-aware-make-sense.md)
1. [Addressing the elephant in the room](elephant-in-room.md)
1. [Where do we take carbon-aware from here? Introducing grid-aware computing](grid-aware-computing.md)
1. [What can you do to help?](how-can-you-help.md)

## Context/about 

The body of work presented here, started after Ismael posted some questions and research into the <a href="https://climateaction.tech/community/">CAT's Slack</a>. Hannah, amongst many others picked up on the discussion. 

Following debate, Hannah and Ismael agreed to work together to further develop the research on the problems with carbon-aware and ultimately come up with the outline of a proposal to improve it. 

If it were not for <a href="https://cliamteaction.tech">CAT</a> this work would not have come to fruition on this way - thank you CAT for bringing people together!
